everyone welcome back and let's write
some more neat code today so today let's
solve
merge intervals we are given an array of
intervals with a start and an end value
so an interval is a start and end value
you can think of it like a class or a
meeting or some
kind of time period or whatever and for
each of these
intervals we want to take all the
overlapping
intervals and then merge them and then
we're going to have a new
output array of intervals and since we
merged the overlapping intervals the
result
is going to be non-overlapping so in
this case
we see we have an interval 1 3 and
2 6. so these two are overlapping we can
merge them into one
interval 1 6. the remaining two
intervals
are non-overlapping so they do not get
merged and then we see that the
output has three on intervals one
that we had to merge to get and then the
two
original and this second example just
basically clarifies that if we have one
interval one four and a second interval
four
five now these aren't technically
overlapping
in a sense right like we have one to
four and
four to five so they clarify that these
two actually
do count as overlapping so what's a
good and efficient way to solve this
problem let's say we're given
the exact same four intervals that we
were given in the original example but
notice
this time they're out of order this one
is 1 3 this one is 8
10 this is 2 6. it was originally over
here
right they had given the input to us in
sorted
order right so that's kind of a hint
that it might be helpful for us
to keep our intervals in sorted order
but what's a good way to kind of
visualize what's actually going on with
these intervals
these numbers are pretty descriptive but
it's better to have a picture to look at
so i'm gonna draw a number line and
we're gonna
start at zero because they clarify for
us in the problem
that any interval is not gonna start at
like a negative value so we can
start at zero so let's just start
putting these
intervals into our number line and see
what happens
so we have one three so i'm gonna
have a line going from one
going from one to three which is over
here
so this interval is length 2. we'll have
an interval going from
8 to 10 another interval of length
2. we'll have an interval from 15 to 18
and the last interval is from two to six
so notice this time we actually do have
an
overlapping interval two to six
so i'm gonna draw it above so i'm gonna
draw it
where it's obvious that we have two
intervals that are
overlapping now when you actually draw
out the number line
it kind of becomes obvious that
it would be very helpful for us to take
these
intervals and sort them based on
the start value we don't care so much
about the end value because we want to
go through our number line starting
at the beginning starting at the start
value
going to the next start value going to
the next start value and then continuing
that
because this allows us to detect
so for example we look at this interval
first we know it goes
from one to three next we look
at the second interval it goes from
two to six and since we just looked at
the previous interval
over here we know that this one overlaps
with this one so what are we going to do
we're going to merge them
together into a new interval
so it results in a new interval from
1 to 6 because remember ultimately we
are trying to
merge the intervals and then we go to
our next starting position which is
a so we have an interval from 8 to 10
and we know it does not merge with this
one because they're non-overlapping we
got some
space over here right lastly we go to
this interval and it goes from 15
to 18 we know it does not overlap with
this one
there's all this space in between right
so just to reiterate we're going to take
our input list of intervals sort
by the start value
of each interval and then we're gonna
iterate through each start value right
starting at
the first one then the next one then
this one
then this one and where each time we're
going to check okay
does the current interval does the most
recent interval
overlap with the previous interval if it
doesn't we don't do anything
if it does which it did in this case
then we can merge them into one interval
now it might seem unnecessary to even
have a picture like this because
this interval problem is actually
straightforward right we just sort and
then we merge the intervals
but there are a lot more difficult
interval problems
where i'm telling you drawing a picture
like this
drawing a number line to understand
what's actually going
on makes the problem a lot easier to
solve
so now let's write the code remember we
are sorting the entire input
so the and then iterating through the
input so the
time complexity is going to be big o n
log n
where n is the number of intervals that
we're given
so thankfully for us in python it's
pretty straightforward to sort we can
just take
interval sort and what's the key we're
sorting by because remember we're
sorting a list
of pairs so the key is going to be a
in python a lambda function so in this
case
i is going to stand for the interval and
what value of this interval are we going
to use we're going to use the first
value so at index
0 we're sorting by the start value if we
wanted to sort by the end value this
would be
i of 1 but we're going to sort by the
start value only
and so let's also declare an output
where we're going to put the merged
intervals so i'm not going to initialize
this to
empty i'm actually going to take the
first interval
and have it inserted into the output
just so
i can avoid an edge case so we have
initialized
the interval so now we're going to
iterate through every
single interval in sorted order
and technically we can skip the first
one because we already added the first
interval into the output
and instead of just having the interval
itself we know we're going to use the
start and end value so i'm just going to
extract them
like this and so how do we know if
the interval is overlapping with the
most recent
interval well we can get from our output
this is why i added one so we can avoid
the edge case from our
output we can get the most recently
added interval
and get the end value of it because
that's what we need to know if it
overlaps
so the end value of the most recent
interval
we'll call it last end and we're going
to check of the current interval we're
at the start and end value
we're iterating through if the star
is less than or equal
to the last ending value that means
they're overlapping the equal is
important because they
they told us in the second example that
we are counting
equal as overlapping so if they are
overlapping what are we gonna do we're
gonna merge them
how do we merge them well all we have to
do
is take the most recently added
interval and take the ending value
of it and set it to the max
of itself which we already have in last
end
and the max of the current end value
that we're at
and the reason we need to take the max
is what if we had
two intervals starting at 1 5
and the second interval is 2
4 because we would iterate through them
in this order because this has a
starting value of 1 this has a starting
value of 2 but notice how this actually
has a
larger end value than this one so if we
just take
4 and merge this together and set this
to four we're actually making the
interval
smaller we want to keep the five because
merging these two together
is going to actually result in one
five so in the case that they're
non-overlapping what are we going to do
well we don't have to merge but we do
have to
take that interval and still add it to
our
output so we're going to take start end
and just add it to our output so what
would be an example of that well what if
we had
7 a right these two intervals are
non-overlapping so the result would
actually
be itself right we don't have to make
any changes we don't have to merge
we can just leave it as it is and that's
actually it
so we didn't really have to do anything
since we used the
built in sort we took care of the main
problem
main part of this problem and all we
have to do now is return
the output and so this is a pretty
efficient solution
i hope this kind of explained a little
bit of the intuition
and you kind of have like a visual
picture of what is actually going
on as we run this algorithm and why
we're doing it the way we
are and i hope this was helpful if you
enjoyed
please leave a like and subscribe it
supports the channel a lot
and i'll hopefully see you pretty soon